---
title: "An Easy ELK Demo"
date: 2026-07-23
author: "vmah1ndra"
tags: ["incident response", "blue team", "SIEM"]
---

This Spring, I was brought in to guest lecture the basics of an ELK stack (and similar deployments of Elasticsearch). This was for an Incident Response class, focusing on SIEM deployments, ingestion of logs, investigation, and reporting. While many new SIEMs are more popular than ELK with custom features and scalability specific to security deployments, learning how ELK works translates into learning how some other SIEM solutions work under the hood. Some notable SIEMs on the market that use ELK as their core infrastructure include Wazuh, Apache Metron, and Logz.io.

Elasticsearch (The E in ELK) is a distributed search and analytics engine that can return complex search queries in an efficient and scalable way. Elastic agents collect information in the form of logs and security events or Logstash (the L in ELK) forwards logs so that the data may be indexed by Elasticsearch. Finally, Kibana (you guessed it, the K in ELK) uses queries from a visualization dashboard to represent this information in a useful way. Potentially, a SOC analyst will use this dashboard to make sure they can see any interesting security events and investigate further. Queries can be made on the fly, offering the information you need when you need it without overwhelming you, if you know what to ask for. These queries are often in EQL (Event Query Language) or KQL (Kibana Query Language). It is important to note that just the ELK stack is not a security/SIEM architecture, this stack may be used for a variety of applications where polling large amounts of data is required.

The best way to learn about architectures and pipelines is by trying it out and seeing what features you can stumble upon. Just trying out an implementation that has a steep learning curve creates resistance to spending time reading the documentation and deploying each part. Instead, for the class, I had a small demo (that mostly worked, more below). The demo used the Elastic Cloud, which allows a free trial for 14 days, and a machine acting as an agent to be monitored by the SIEM. 

- You can try this yourself [here](https://cloud.elastic.co/registration). No credit card is required for this trial, and no infrastructure resources are used as this is completely cloud-hosted. 
- The "Create a Deployment" page may ask a few details, be sure to select "Security (SIEM)" and a region near your physical location.
- The deployment may take a couple minutes to launch. Unfortunately, trying to do this with a class of 100+ students caused this part to run much slower than expected.
- Once the dashboard pops up, you may add agents to monitor using Elastic like most SIEMs. At the time of this demo, this was found in the **sidebar -> "more" -> "Assets" -> "Agents" -> "Add Agent"**.
- The page will load up a line of code to be entered in your agents' terminal, based on the OS chosen.
- Once correctly enrolled as an agent, you may add integrations that are maintained by the Elastic Agent on the enrolled machine. Clicking on an appropriate integration on the dashboard will allow you to see logs related to the activities monitored by the integration on Elastic Cloud.

Figuring out which integrations to have and what rules to look for greatly increase how powerful your SIEM becomes. Remember that Elasticsearch is a superior method to query large amounts of data and how they are related in a quick and efficient way. Having a large amount of data ingested (as long as it does not bog down the network or cause memory storage issues) is good. This leads to querying collected data in a way that decreases alert fatigue while keeping all relevant alerts monitored.

Try it yourself.
